---
layout: home
permalink: /introduction
title: "Introduction"
excerpt: ""
image:
  feature: /banners/01_banner.jpg
toc: true
---
# Introduction
A rigorous scientific process is essential to forming sound conclusions that can inform evidence-based decision-making. This process starts with defining a research question, assessing what level of information is needed and then critically assessing how that information should be obtained (see Table 2.1 and Hayes et al.,* *in revision). Evidence can be obtained from a variety of sources, ranging from expert opinion, through ad-hoc data collection, then well-designed observational surveys, and finally to randomised controlled experiments. Well-designed experiments/surveys that are targeted to the research question, however, are also generally more expensive than expert opinion, which is a source of information that may be adequate in some certain situations (see Leek and Peng, 2015). Table 2.1 provides a brief overview of the hierarchy of research questions and the types of data that are appropriate to answer them.

Table 2.1 Different types of research questions (adapted from Leek and Peng, 2015)

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>Research Type</td>
    <td>Description</td>
    <td>Example Question</td>
    <td>Complexity</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Descriptive associations</td>
    <td>Summaries of observed data</td>
    <td>What is happening within our sample?</td>
    <td>Simple

</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Exploratory</td>
    <td>Identify trends and relationships within the sample1</td>
    <td>What correlates with reef die-back in the sample?</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Inferential</td>
    <td>Extending the patterns in the sample to the population from which the sample was taken</td>
    <td>What is the status of species X in a marine protected area?</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Predictive</td>
    <td>Predict the values at unsampled locations based on sampled data</td>
    <td>What assemblage is likely to be found in this location?</td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Causal</td>
    <td>Identify the reason for a particular association</td>
    <td>Are the management actions having an effect?</td>
    <td>
Complex</td>
  </tr>
</table>


1There is no way to tell if the *sample’s *associations are the same as the *population’s*

Observational data from well-designed marine surveys are able to research questions from all the about research types and are sometimes the only source of adequate information (Table 2.1). These research questions include those concerning status and trends of biological populations and ecological metrics. Observational data is generated by scientists observing the current state of the system, whether it be an altered system (e.g. after the establishment of an industry) or not (e.g. a baseline survey). The key attribute of observational data is that there is no attempt to intentionally alter the system for the sole purpose of quantifying effects. Rather, the data inform about what the system is like (status) and how it has evolved (trend). As an example, if baseline/ground-truth surveys are conducted inside and outside previously established no-take marine park boundaries, then they would generate observational data. This chapter discusses the requirements for appropriate statistical design for this observational data.

 

Causal research questions (attributing impacts to specific causes) are the most difficult questions to answer. In this case (ideally randomised) controlled experiments are recommended but in this context there are usually limiting factors whose discussion is beyond the scope of this manual (see Hayes et al., in revision). Causal questions require special care and are usually more demanding in terms of the resources needed to answer them. Thus, we focus on (marine) observational surveys, and in particular the design of surveys. Whilst the topics discussed in this section are relevant to investigating causal relationships, other considerations would also be required to be addressed before undertaking causal research (we do not deal with those here). For more information on the evidence hierarchy, and a more thorough description of the different design types for marine ecology, see Hayes et al. (in revision).

 

A key concern in this scientific process is ensuring that survey data are trustworthy and fit-for-purpose (i.e. can answer the research question). To this end, it is important that surveys and monitoring programs are designed and implemented in such a way that the resulting data are: (i) appropriate for the research question under consideration; (ii) are representative of the population under investigation so that (for example) the sample mean is generalisable to the population mean; and (iii) information rich so that uncertainty around inferences is reduced as much as survey budgets will allow. We focus here on survey designs that will help ensure environmental monitoring programs deliver data with these characteristics.

## Scope

This chapter will not follow the usual presentation for statistical design in ecology. Rather, we will focus on what we believe to be most important aspects from a practical (and management) viewpoint. We do not intend it to be like a ‘text-book’ and explicitly do not include formulae or descriptions of tangential details. Readers will want to look elsewhere for such detail (Urquhart and Kincaid, 1999; Gitzen *et al.*, 2012; Thompson, 2012, are a good start, although there are many). We hope to only introduce the relevant concepts and stress that these are the things that should be thought about by all researchers involved with survey planning. In particular, we discuss: (i) setting the research objectives, (ii) randomisation, (iii) efficiency of design, (iv) uncertainty reduction, (v) sampling in space and time, and (vi) specifics for different gear types. This all leads to an illustrative example design, using the *MBHdesign* R-package. (available from CRAN,[ https://cran.r-project.org/package=MBHdesign](https://cran.r-project.org/package=MBHdesign)). For those readers interested in acronyms: *MBHdesign* stands for *M*arine *B*iodiversity *H*ub *design*. The goals and techniques implemented in *MBHdesign* are outlined throughout this chapter.

 
