---
layout: home
permalink: /references
title: "References"
excerpt: ""
image:
  feature: /banners/08_banner.jpg
---
  Althaus, F., N. Hill, R. Ferrari, L. Edwards, R. Przeslawski, C. H. Schönberg, R. Stuart-Smith, N. Barrett, G. Edgar, and J. Colquhoun. 2015. A standardised vocabulary for identifying benthic biota and substrata from underwater imagery: the CATAMI classification scheme. PLoS ONE 10:e0141039.


  Althaus, F., A. Williams, T. Schlacher, R. Kloser, M. Green, B. Barker, N. Bax, P. Brodie, and M. Schlacher-Hoenlinger. 2009. Impacts of bottom trawling on deep-coral ecosystems of seamounts are long-lasting. Marine Ecology Progress Series 397:279-294.


  Barkby, S., S. Williams, O. Pizarro, and M. Jakuba. 2009. An efficient approach to bathymetric SLAM. Pages 219-224 _in_ 2009 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.


  Barker, B. A. J., I. Helmond, N. J. Bax, A. Williams, S. Davenport, and V. A. Wadley. 1999. A vessel-towed camera platform for surveying seafloor habitats of the continental shelf. Continental Shelf Research 19:1161-1170.


  Bicknell, A. W. J., B. J. Godley, E. V. Sheehan, S. C. Votier, and M. J. Witt. 2016. Camera technology for monitoring marine biodiversity and human impact. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 14:424-432.


  Boutros, N., M. R. Shortis, and E. S. Harvey. 2015. A comparison of calibration methods and system configurations of underwater stereo‐video systems for applications in marine ecology. Limnology and Oceanography: Methods 13:224-236.


  Bowden, D. A. and D. O. Jones. 2016a. Towed cameras. Biological Sampling in the Deep Sea:260-284.


  Bowden, D. A. and D. O. B. Jones. 2016b. Towed cameras. Pages 260-284 _in_ M. R. Clark, M. Consalvey, and A. A. Rowden, editors. Biological Sampling in the Deep Sea. John Wiley and Sons.


  Bridge, T. C., R. Ferrari, M. Bryson, R. Hovey, W. F. Figueira, S. B. Williams, O. Pizarro, A. R. Harborne, and M. Byrne. 2014. Variable responses of benthic communities to anomalously warm sea temperatures on a high-latitude coral reef. PLoS ONE 9:e113079.


  Bryson, M., M. Johnson-Roberson, O. Pizarro, and S. B. Williams. 2016. True Color Correction of Autonomous Underwater Vehicle Imagery. Journal of Field Robotics 33:853-874.


  Caimi, F. M., D. M. Kocak, F. Dalgleish, and J. Watson. 2008. Underwater imaging and optics: Recent advances. Pages 1-9 _in_ OCEANS 2008. IEEE.


  Dunlop, K. M., L. A. Kuhnz, H. A. Ruhl, C. L. Huffard, D. W. Caress, R. G. Henthorn, B. W. Hobson, P. McGill, and K. L. Smith. 2015. An evaluation of deep-sea benthic megafauna length measurements obtained with laser and stereo camera methods. Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers 96:38-48.


  Durden, J. M., T. Schoening, F. Althaus, A. Friedman, R. Garcia, A. G. Glover, J. Greinert, N. J. Stout, D. O. B. Jones, A. Jordt, J. W. Kaeli, K. Koser, L. A. Kuhnz, D. Lindsay, K. J. Morris, T. W. Nattkemper, J. Osterloff, H. A. Ruhl, H. Singh, M. Tran & B. J. Bett, 2016.Perspectives in visual imaging for marine biology and ecology: from acquisition to understanding. Oceanography and Marine Biology: An Annual Review, Vol 54 54:1-72. doi:10.1201/9781315368597.


  Durden, J. M., B. J. Bett, T. Schoening, K. J. Morris, T. W. Nattkemper, and H. A. Ruhl. 2016b. Comparison of image annotation data generated by multiple investigators for benthic ecology. Marine Ecology Progress Series 552:61-70.


  Ferrari, R., M. Bryson, T. Bridge, J. Hustache, S. B. Williams, M. Byrne, and W. Figueira. 2016. Quantifying the response of structural complexity and community composition to environmental change in marine communities. Global change biology 22:1965-1975.


  Foster, S. D., M. V. Bravington, A. Williams, F. Althaus, G. M. Laslett, and R. J. Kloser. 2009. Analysis and prediction of faunal distributions from video and multi‐beam sonar data using Markov models. Environmetrics 20:541-560.


  Foster, S. D., H. Shimadzu, and R. Darnell. 2012. Uncertainty in spatially predicted covariates: is it ignorable? Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics) 61:637-652.


  Gomes-Pereira, J. N., V. Auger, K. Beisiegel, R. Benjamin, M. Bergmann, D. Bowden, P. Buhl-Mortensen, F. C. De Leo, G. Dionísio, and J. M. Durden. 2016. Current and future trends in marine image annotation software. Progress in Oceanography 149:106-120.


  Harvey, E., M. Shortis, M. Stadler, and M. Cappo. 2002. A comparison of the accuracy and precision of measurements from single and stereo-video systems. Marine Technology Society Journal 36:38-49.


  Hayes, K. R., J. M. Dambacher, P. T. Hedge, D. Watts, S. D. Foster, P. A. Thompson, G. R. Hosack, P. K. Dunstan, and N. J. Bax. 2015. Towards a blueprint for monitoring Key Ecological features in the Commonwealth Marine Area. NERP Marine Biodiversity Hub, Hobart.


  Ingleton, T.C., Allen, K., Morris, B., 2018. Technical Report: SeaBed NSW - Standard Operating Procedures for multibeam surveying v1.1. New South Wales Government, Office of Environment and Heritage, pp. 44, https://www.environment.nsw.gov.au/-/media/OEH/Corporate-Site/Documents/Research/Our-science-and-research/seabed-nsw-standard-operating-procedures-multibeam-surveying-190101.pdf


  James, L. C., M. P. Marzloff, N. Barrett, A. Friedman, and C. R. Johnson. 2017. Changes in deep reef benthic community composition across a latitudinal and environmental gradient in temperate Eastern Australia. Marine Ecology Progress Series 565:35-52.


  Jones, D. O., B. J. Bett, R. B. Wynn, and D. G. Masson. 2009. The use of towed camera platforms in deep-water science. Underwater Technology 28:41-50.


  Jordan, A., P. Davies, T. Ingleton, E. Foulsham, J. Neilson, and T. Pritchard. 2010. Seabed habitat mapping of the continental shelf of NSW Department of Environment, Climate Change and Water NSW, Sydney.


  Marouchos A., Sherlock M., Filisetti A., Williams A. 2019. Underwater imaging on self-contained tethered systems _OCEANS 2017 - Anchorage_,  2017-January, pp. 1-5.


  Katsanevakis, S., A. Weber, C. Pipitone, M. Leopold, M. Cronin, M. Scheidat, T. K. Doyle, L. Buhl-Mortensen, P. Buhl-Mortensen, G. D'Anna, I. de Boois, P. Dalpadado, D. Damalas, F. Fiorentino, G. Garofalo, V. M. Giacalone, K. L. Hawley, Y. Issaris, J. Jansen, C. M. Knight, L. Knittweis, I. Kroncke, S. Mirto, I. Muxika, H. Reiss, H. R. Skjoldal, and S. Voge. 2012. Monitoring marine populations and communities: methods dealing with imperfect detectability. Aquatic Biology 16:31-52.


  Kocak, D. M., F. R. Dalgleish, F. M. Caimi, and Y. Y. Schechner. A Focus on Recent Developments and Trends in Underwater Imaging.


  Kocak, D. M., F. R. Dalgleish, F. M. Caimi, and Y. Y. Schechner. 2008. A focus on recent developments and trends in underwater imaging. Marine Technology Society Journal 42:52-67.


  Lawrence, E., K. Hayes, V. Lucieer, S. Nichol, J. Dambacher, and N. Hill. 2015. Mapping Habitats and Developing Baselines in Offshore Marine Reserves with Little Prior Knowledge: A Critical Evaluation of a New Approach. PLoS ONE 10:e0141051.


  Ling, S. D., I. Mahon, M. Marzloff, O. Pizarro, C. Johnson, and S. Williams. 2016. Stereo‐imaging AUV detects trends in sea urchin abundance on deep overgrazed reefs. Limnology and Oceanography: Methods 14:293-304.


  Logan, J. M., M. A. Young, E. S. Harvey, A. C. G. Schimel, and D. Ierodiaconou. 2017. Combining underwater video methods improves effectiveness of demersal fish assemblage surveys across habitats. Marine Ecology Progress Series 582:181-200.


  Mitchell, P. J., J. Monk, and L. Laurenson. 2017. Sensitivity of fine‐scale species distribution models to locational uncertainty in occurrence data across multiple sample sizes. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 8:12-21.


  Monk, J., N. S. Barrett, N. A. Hill, V. L. Lucieer, S. L. Nichol, P. J. W. Siwabessy, and S. B. Williams. 2016. Outcropping reef ledges drive patterns of epibenthic assemblage diversity on cross-shelf habitats. Biodiversity and conservation 25:485-502.


  Nichol, S., F. Howard, J. Kool, M. Stowar, P. Bouchet, L. Radke, J. Siwabessy, R. Przeslawski, K. Picard, B. Alvarez de Glasby, J. Colquhoun, T. Letessier, and A. Heyward. 2013. Oceanic Shoals Commonwealth Marine Reserve (Timor Sea) Biodiversity Survey: GA0339/SOL5650 Post-Survey Report. Record 2013/38, Geoscience Australia, Canberra.


  Palomer, A., P. Ridao, D. Ribas, A. Mallios, and G. Vallicrosa. 2013. A Comparison of G2o Graph SLAM and EKF Pose Based SLAM with Bathymetry Grids. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 46:286-291.


  Perkins, N. R., S. D. Foster, N. A. Hill, and N. S. Barrett. 2016. Image subsampling and point scoring approaches for large-scale marine benthic monitoring programs. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 176:36-46.


  Perkins, N. R., S. D. Foster, N. A. Hill, M. P. Marzloff, and N. S. Barrett. 2017. Temporal and spatial variability in the cover of deep reef species: Implications for monitoring. Ecological Indicators 77:337-347.


  Perkins, N. R., N. A. Hill, S. D. Foster, and N. S. Barrett. 2015. Altered niche of an ecologically significant urchin species, Centrostephanus rodgersii, in its extended range revealed using an Autonomous Underwater Vehicle. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 155:56-65.


  Pizarro, O., A. Friedman, M. Bryson, S. B. Williams, and J. Madin. 2017. A simple, fast, and repeatable survey method for underwater visual 3D benthic mapping and monitoring. Ecology and Evolution 7:1770-1782.


  Przeslawski, R., N. Barrett, N. Bax, A. Carroll, S. Foster, M. Heupel, J. Jansen, T. Langlois, T. Moltmann, J. Pocklington, R. Stuart-Smith, M. Wyatt. 2019. Data Discoverability and Accessibility: Report from July 2019 Workshop on Marine Imagery. Report to the National Environmental Science Program, Marine Biodiversity Hub. Geoscience Australia.


  Przeslawski, R., Foster, S., Monk, J., Langlois, T., Lucieer, V., Stuart-Smith, R. 2018. Comparative Assessment of Seafloor Sampling Platforms. Report to the National Environmental Science Programme, Marine Biodiversity Hub. Geoscience Australia.  57 pp.


  Rattray, A., D. Ierodiaconou, J. Monk, L. Laurenson, and P. Kennedy. 2014. Quantification of spatial and thematic uncertainty in the application of underwater video for benthic habitat mapping. Marine Geodesy 37:315-336.


  Roelfsema, C. M., S. R. Phinn, and K. E. Joyce. 2006. Evaluating benthic survey techniques for validating maps of coral reefs derived from remotely sensed images. Pages 1771-1780 _in_ Proc 10th Int Coral Reef Symp.


  Seiler, J., A. Williams, and N. Barrett. 2012. Assessing size, abundance and habitat preferences of the Ocean Perch Helicolenus percoides using a AUV-borne stereo camera system. Fisheries Research 129:64-72.


  Sheehan, E. V., S. Vaz, E. Pettifer, N. L. Foster, S. J. Nancollas, S. Cousens, L. Holmes, J. V. Facq, G. Germain, and M. J. Attrill. 2016. An experimental comparison of three towed underwater video systems using species metrics, benthic impact and performance. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 7:843-852.


  Sherlock, M., A. Marouchos, A. Williams, and A. Tyndall. 2016. A vessel towed platform for deepwater high resolution benthic imaging. Pages 1-6 _in_ OCEANS 2016-Shanghai. IEEE.


  Shortis, M., E. Harvey, and D. Abdo. 2009. A review of underwater stereo-image measurement for marine biology and ecology applications.


  Shortis, M., J. Seager, A. Williams, B. Barker, and M. Sherlock. 2007. A towed body stereo-video system for deep water benthic habitat surveys. Pages 150-157 _in_ Eighth Conf. Optical.


  Shortis, M., J. Seager, A. Williams, B. Barker, and M. Sherlock. 2008. Using stereo-video for deep water benthic habitat surveys. Marine Technology Society Journal 42:28-37.


  Stoklosa, J., C. Daly, S. D. Foster, M. B. Ashcroft, and D. I. Warton. 2015. A climate of uncertainty: accounting for error in climate variables for species distribution models. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 6:412-423.


  Van Rein, H., D. Schoeman, C. Brown, R. Quinn, and J. Breen. 2011. Development of benthic monitoring methods using photoquadrats and scuba on heterogeneous hard‐substrata: a boulder‐slope community case study. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems 21:676-689.


  Williams, A., F. Althaus, and T. A. Schlacher. 2015. Towed camera imagery and benthic sled catches provide different views of seamount benthic diversity. Limnology and Oceanography: Methods 13:62-73.


  Williams, S. B., O. R. Pizarro, M. V. Jakuba, C. R. Johnson, N. S. Barrett, R. C. Babcock, G. A. Kendrick, P. D. Steinberg, A. J. Heyward, and P. J. Doherty. 2012a. Monitoring of benthic reference sites: using an autonomous underwater vehicle. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 19:73-84.


  Williams, S. B., O. R. Pizarro, M. V. Jakuba, C. R. Johnson, N. S. Barrett, R. C. Babcock, G. A. Kendrick, P. D. Steinberg, A. J. Heyward, P. J. Doherty, I. Mahon, M. Johnson-Roberson, D. Steinberg, and A. Friedman. 2012b. Monitoring of Benthic Reference Sites: Using an Autonomous Underwater Vehicle. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 19:73-84.
